---
layout: doc
title: Demos
---

Two types of demo program sets will be available: 1. Makefile Demos 1.
Eclipse Demos

Makefile demos use simple make scripts. Eclipse demos will use the
built-in Eclipse project manager.

Instructions for using other IDEs project managers may be added in due
time.

If you are using the propgcc repository for builds instead of a
release package, you should copy the appropriate system bstc file from
propgcc/release to a directory in your path. Make a copy of bstc.linux
or bstc.osx there to "bstc" with no extension.

Using Makefile Demos
--------------------

People fear, loathe, and love makefiles. Propeller GCC demos currently
use makefiles because the developers don't mind using them. The demo
makefiles are very simple.

Using makefiles is much easier than writing makefiles. The author is
not trying to convert anyone, it's just that there are some simple
demos that use make.

Assuming you have downloaded a package and followed installation
instructions, you can build the demos as follows below. The make
process requires a command console window (or an IDE that runs make in
the background).

To build all demos in the default mode for the demo, in a console
window, go to the demo folder used during install. 1. \$ cd demos 1.
\$ make

To make all demos from scratch: 1. \$ make clean 1. \$ make

Alternatively to make all demos from scratch: 1. \$ make clean; make

To build the fft\_bench demo for LMM 1. \$ cd demos/fft 1. \$ make
clean 1. \$ make

To build the fft\_bench demo for XMMC 1. \$ cd demos/fft 1. \$ make
clean 1. \$ make MODEL=XMMC

Some demos have separate directories for the different MODEL builds.
1. \$ cd demos/fibo/cog 1. \$ make 1. \$ cd demos/fibo/lmm 1. \$ make
1. \$ cd demos/fibo/xmmc 1. \$ make 1. \$ cd demos/fibo/xmm 1. \$ make

Many makefiles allow you to build the program and download it to your
Propeller. To do it all in one command, PORT and BOARD must be
specified. You can also use [propeller-load](PropGccLoader.md)
separately.

The PORT for linux can be a simple number (say \#) which will expand
by default to /dev/ttyUSB\#. I.E. PORT=0 says use /dev/ttyUSB0. For
MAC users, it's best to set PORT to the name given by OSX to your
port.

The BOARD should be set to HUB for LMM programs or one of the
appropriate [propeller-load.cfg](PropGccLoader.md) boards for XMM
programs. I.E. BOARD=hub (for LMM programs) or BOARD=eeprom (for XMMC
programs).

    Begin Example

    $ make PORT=0 BOARD=hub run
    rm -f *.o *.elf *.cog *.binary
    propeller-elf-gcc -O2 -mfcache -mlmm -o fft_bench.o -c fft_bench.c
    propeller-elf-gcc -mlmm  -o fft_bench.elf fft_bench.o
    propeller-load -p0 -bhub fft_bench.elf -r -t
    Propeller Version 1 on /dev/ttyUSB0
    Writing 25580 bytes to Propeller RAM.
    Verifying ... Upload OK!
    fft_bench v1.0
    Freq.    Magnitude
    00000000 1fe
    000000c0 1ff
    00000140 1ff
    00000200 1ff
    1024 point bit-reversal and butterfly run time = 47 ms

    End Example

Using Eclipse Demos
-------------------

Work in progress ...
