---
layout: doc
title: GUI Plugin Notes
---

Propeller-GCC is a command line tool. It comes with a loader for
programming various basic board types. The application will configure
library and other independent devices.

Details
=======

Some key factors for GUI elements are: board type selection, serial port
selection, and device configurations.

An IDE may eventually have: \* A GUI Combo Box to select basic boards
from [propeller-load.cfg](PropGccLoaderConfig.md) \* A GUI Combo Box to
select the serial port \* A GUI to select non-boot device hardware pins
numbers from a list.

> All non-boot device driver hardware elements will be configured in the
> application. Having the ability to choose the device configuration in
> a GUI is desirable. A configuration would allow showcasing Propeller
> Powered Devices as compared to which PIC to use.

The board type and serial port select GUI will set options for the
loader. Programming type (-e -l -r) should also be configurable. There
may be other kinds of IDE/loader interfaces.

Today the [propeller-load](PropGccLoader.md) program will do these
things: \* Use a basic boards specified by -b flag \* Use properties
from the board type entry \* Program Propeller for LMM or XMM modes
based on compile \* Use the associated cache driver for XMM modes \* Use
XMM cache driver to write to Flash or SRAM \* Use XMM cache with SD
loader for non-volatile store for SRAM \* Create an Propeller GCC
executable for saving to SD card \* Allow saving to RAM, EEPROM, or as
`*`SD loader in EEPROM \* Optionally launch a serial terminal program \*
Will not save properties for devices not related to booting

*NOTE: `*`SD loader is still work in progress.*
